---
date: 2023-07-03
title: "Thematic workshop on networks and biological models inference"
summary: "Le **3 et 4 juillet 2023** à **Marseille**"
categories: "Manifestations"
---

The aim is to gather people working on this topic to present recent results and discuss challenges and perspectives. The workshop will take place on 3 and 4 July 2023 at CIRM in Marseille. 

We are grateful to GDR [IM](https://www.gdr-im.fr/), [BIM](https://www.gdr-bim.cnrs.fr/), [RADIA](https://www.gdria.fr/), and RT [MathSAV](https://mathsav.math.cnrs.fr) for their financial support.

### Registration

⚠️ Accomodation and travel is at the charge of participants.

The event is full, we cannot accept additional participants. We will select and confirm the registrations very soon.

### Scientific Program

This is a tentative program, yet to be confirmed.

**Monday, July 3rd** 

Morning session 10:00-12:00

- 10:00 - 10:30: Malvina Marku (INSERM, CRCT), *Data-driven regulatory network inference, an introduction*
- 10:30 - 11:00: Paola Vera-Licona (UConn Health), *Model checking for inferred static networks*
- 11:00 - 11:30: Ulysse Herbach (Inria, Nancy), *Gene expression and regulatory networks: bridging the gap between mechanistic modeling and statistical learning*
- 11:30 - 12:00: Maxime Folschette (Centrale Lille Institut), *Learning Biological Regulatory Networks from Time Series with LFIT: Theory and Practice*

Afternoon session 14:00 - 15:30

- 14:00 - 14:30: Mathieu Bolteau (LS2N Univ Nantes)
- 14:30 - 15:00: Loïc Paulevé (CNRS/LaBRI Univ Bordeaux)
- 15:00 - 15:30: Athénaïs Vaginay (Inria Nancy)

Afternoon session 16:00 - 17:30
- 16:00 - 16:30: Laetitia Gibart (I3S, Univ Côte d'Azur)
- 16:30 - 17:00: Franck Delaplace (Paris-Saclay University - Univ. Evry), *TaBooN Boolean Network Synthesis Based on Tabu Search*
- 17:00 - 17:30: Discussion 

**Tuesday, July 4rth** 

Morning session 09:30 - 12:00

- 09:30 - 10:00: Anaïs Baudaot (MMG, Univ Aix Marseille), *Network-based multimodal data integration*
- 10:00 - 10:30: Mathieu Hemery (Inria Saclay), *Artificial CRN synthesis from function specification and natural CRN repository screening*
- 10:30 - 11:00: François Fages (Inria Saclay), *Equation discovery and chemical reaction model learning from data time series*
- 11:00 - 12:00: Wrap-up discussion, and concluding remarks


### Abstracts

By order of appearance

**Malvina Marku (INSERM, CRCT)**\
*Data-driven regulatory network inference, an introduction*\
Dissecting cellular reprogramming and crosstalk through gene regulatory networks
Gene regulatory networks are highly valuable conceptual models of biological systems. The inference of GRNs has posed a significant challenge in the field of systems biology for approximately two decades. In an ideal scenario, a comprehensive collection of GRNs would exist, encompassing all cell types and transcription factors, obtained through chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-seq) followed by sequencing. Establishing GRNs in engineered cells would involve quantifying their overall transcription factor binding profiles and comparing them to the reference dataset. Unfortunately, such data is currently unavailable. However, recently published methods for reconstructing GRNs using genome-wide expression data have greatly improved. Additionally, repositories of gene expression have accumulated diverse biological perturbations, which are essential for accurately reconstructing GRNs.
In this presentation we provide an introduction to the basic concepts underpinning network inference tools, and discuss some unresolved challenges in the field. As a practical example, we present our preliminary results on GRN inference of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia cells, aiming at understanding the crosstalk between cancer cells and immune cells from a network perspective.

**Paola Vera-Licona (UConn Health)**\
*Model checking for inferred static networks*\
After inferring the static graph representation of a gene regulatory network, it's crucial to ensure its accuracy. If a mathematical model of such inferred network is available, there are methods and tools to perform model checking. However, this is not always the case when only the static network (graph representation) is available. In this presentation, we will explore some strategies and tools based on semi-dynamic simulation and linkage logic theory that can be used for model checking of static networks, along with some examples.

**Ulysse Herbach (INRIA, Nancy)**\
*Gene expression and regulatory networks: bridging the gap between mechanistic modeling and statistical learning*\
Inferring graphs of interactions between genes has become a textbook case for high-dimensional statistics, while models describing gene expression at the molecular level have come into their own with the advent of single-cell data. Linking these two approaches seems crucial today, but the dialogue is far from obvious: statistical models often suffer from a lack of biological interpretability, and mechanistic models are known to be difficult to calibrate from real data. We recently introduced two strategies that exploit time-course scRNA-seq data, where single-cell profiling is performed after a stimulus: Harissa, a mechanistic network model driven by transcriptional bursting, and Cardamom, a scalable inference method seen as model calibration. Thanks to this correspondence, I will show that it is possible to combine the two approaches so that the same dynamical model can be used simultaneously as an inference tool, to reconstruct biologically relevant causal networks, and as a simulation tool, to generate realistic transcriptional profiles in a non-trivial way through gene interactions.

**Franck Delaplace (Paris-Saclay University - Univ. Evry)**\
*TaBooN Boolean Network Synthesis Based on Tabu Search*\
Recent developments in Omics-technologies revolutionized the investigation of biology by producing molecular data in multiple dimensions and scale. This breakthrough in biology raises the crucial issue of their interpretation based on modeling. In this undertaking, the network provides a suitable framework for modeling the interactions between molecules. A biological network comprises nodes referring to the components such as genes or proteins, and the edges/arcs formalizing interactions between them. The evolution of the interactions is then modeled by the definition of a dynamical system. Among the different network categories, the Boolean network offers a reliable qualitative framework for modeling the biological systems. Automatically synthesizing a Boolean network from experimental data, therefore, remains a necessary but challenging issue. We present TaBooN, an original work-flow for synthesizing Boolean Networks from biological data. The methodology uses the data in the form of Boolean profiles for inferring all the potential local formula inference. The set of all compatible formulas form the model space from which the most truthful model regarding biological knowledge can be found.Then the selection of the fittest model is achieved by a Tabu-search algorithm. TaBooN is an automated method for Boolean Network inference from experimental data that helps biologists synthesize a reliable model faster and assist in evaluating and optimizing the biological networks’ dynamic behavior, further modeling and predictions.

**Anaïs Baudot (MMG, Univ Aix Marseille)**\
*Network-based multimodal data integration*\
Recent technological advances and the growing availability of biomedical datasets offer unprecedented opportunities to better understand human diseases. However, translating the sheer volume and heterogeneity of these data into meaningful insights require proper computational strategies. In this presentation, I will discuss various approaches for integrating heterogeneous datasets using interaction network frameworks. Specifically, I will outline temporal, multiplex, and multilayer networks, and their associated exploration algorithms, such as community identification, random walks, or network embedding. I will illustrate the application of these different algorithms in the context of the analysis of human diseases.


**Mathieu Hemery (Inria Saclay)**\
*Artificial CRN synthesis from function specification and natural CRN repository screening*\
“What I cannot build. I do not understand.” ― Richard Feynman\
BioChemical Reactions Network (CRN) are far from random graphs. They are highly structured networks that have evolved to fulfill biological functions in order to increase the reproductive success of their organisms. Focusing on a mathematical definition of these functions, we will see how to build from scratch an abstract CRN able to implement them, be it through in silico evolution or direct compilation algorithm. Then using some graph tools may help us scan a large biomodels repository to find concretization of this abstract CRN, which may eventually give us a deep insight into the structure of real biomodels.

### Organization
- Malvina Marku
- Laurence Calzone
- Cédric Lhoussaine
- Loïc Paulevé
- Élisbeth Rémy
