---
date: 2021-12-03 13:00:00
title: "Séminaire virtuel: vendredi 3 décembre 2021"
summary: "Manish Kushwaha (Team Bio-RetroSynth, INRAE) et Athénaïs Vaginay (capsid team CRAN/LORIA)"
categories: "Séminaires"
---

### 13h00 - 13h30 -- Manish Kushwaha (Team Bio-RetroSynth, INRAE)

**Bacteriophages for intercellular communication in bacterial cultures**

Recent advances in biological engineering promise to deliver
many high impact biotechnology solutions. However, as the engineered
components increase in size they impose substantial burden on the host
cells, resulting in their subsequent loss by mutation and negative
selection. A possible solution involves the division of labour by
distributing the engineered components into several cells. However, it
brings with it the challenge of intercellular communication between the
constituent cells of the consortium. We develop methods for bacterial
intercellular communication that repurpose components from bacteriophage
machinery to establish communication channels for distributed
implementation of genetic circuits.

### 13h30 - 14h00 -- Athénaïs Vaginay (capsid team CRAN/LORIA)

**From Chemical Reaction Networks to Boolean Networks, Automatically**

To understand and study biological systems it is necessary to
model them within a mathematical formalism. Chemical Reaction Networks
(CRN) are a widely used modelling formalism and many CRN models are
available in repositories such as Biomodels. While those models can be
interpreted with different semantics, Boolean Networks (BNs) are better
suited in some cases. My talk is about our automatic pipeline to transforms
a given CRN model to a set of compatible BNs. I will presents the steps of
this pipeline and show empirical evidence that the constructed BNs are in
line with the structure and the dynamics of a given CRN (i.e., they are
compatible with the CRN). I will also discuss the current limitations of
the pipeline.
