---
date: 2022-04-01 13:00:00
title: "Séminaire virtuel: vendredi 1 avril 2022"
summary: "Kevin Atsou (Inria) et Carito Guziolowski (LS2N)"
categories: "Séminaires"
---



[Lien Zoom](https://u-bordeaux-fr.zoom.us/j/86764096440?pwd=b01qOG04RTMvRWNOVHBYR1ZIbkVaUT09)
* Meeting ID: 867 6409 6440
* passcode: 149120 


### 13h00 - 13h30 -- Kevin Atsou (Inria)

**A size and space structured model of tumor immune interactions describes a key role for protumor immune cells in breaking equilibrium states in tumorigenesis**

Abstract:
Switching from the healthy stage to the uncontrolled development of tumors relies on complicated mechanisms and the activation of antagonistic immune responses, that can ultimately favor the tumor growth. We introduce here a mathematical model intended to describe the interactions between the immune system and tumors. The model is based on partial differential equations, describing the displacement of immune cells subjected to both diffusion and chemotactic mechanisms, the strength of which is driven by the development of the tumors. The model takes into account the dual nature of the immune response, with the activation of both antitumor and protumor mechanisms. The competition between these antagonistic effects leads to either equilibrium or escape phases, which reproduces features of tumor development observed in experimental and clinical settings. Next, we consider on numerical grounds the efficacy of treatments: the numerical study brings out interesting hints on immunotherapy strategies, concerning the role of the administered dose, the role of the administration time and the interest in combining treatments acting on different aspects of the immune response. Such mathematical model can shed light on the conditions where the tumor can be maintained in a viable state and also provide useful hints for personalized, efficient, therapeutic strategies, boosting the antitumor immune response, and reducing the protumor actions.

Résumé:
Le passage du stade sain à la croissance incontrôlée des tumeurs repose sur des mécanismes compliqués et l'activation de réponses immunitaires antagonistes, qui peuvent à terme favoriser la croissance tumorale. Nous introduisons ici un modèle mathématique destiné à décrire les interactions entre le système immunitaire et les tumeurs. Le modèle est basé sur des équations aux dérivées partielles, décrivant le déplacement de cellules immunitaires soumises à la fois à des mécanismes de diffusion et de chimiotactisme, dont la force est déterminée par le développement des tumeurs. Le modèle prend en compte la double nature de la réponse immunitaire, avec l'activation des mécanismes antitumoraux et pro-tumoraux. La compétition entre ces effets antagonistes conduit soit à des phases d'équilibre, soit à des phases d'échappement, qui reproduisent les caractéristiques du développement tumoral observé dans des contextes expérimentaux et cliniques. Ensuite, nous considérons sur des bases numériques l'efficacité des traitements : l'étude numérique apporte des pistes intéressantes sur les stratégies d'immunothérapie, concernant le rôle de la dose administrée, le rôle du temps d'administration et l'intérêt de combiner des traitements agissant sur différents aspects du système immunitaire. Un tel modèle mathématique peut faire la lumière sur les conditions dans lesquelles la tumeur peut être maintenue dans un état viable et également fournir des pistes utiles pour des stratégies thérapeutiques personnalisées et efficaces, renforçant la réponse immunitaire antitumorale et réduisant les actions pro-tumorales.

### 13h30 - 14h00 -- Carito Guziolowski (LS2N, Nantes Université)

**Machine Learning, Logic Programming and Learning Boolean Networks**

This talk will present a work published on 2018 (Chebouba et al., BMC Bioinformatics),
applied to discriminate the response of Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) patients. The data we
used was obtained from the DREAM 9 challenge, specifically: given a phosphoproteomic
dataset composed of 231 measured proteins across 191 AML individuals, and knowing which
prognostic (“complete remission” or “resistant”) the individuals had after receiving treatment,
find the computational model that fits both prognostics. Our model was a family of Boolean
networks (BNs) that explained the data of remission/resistant classes of AML patients. We
later confirmed that the different rewiring of protein PIK3CA present in the learned BN
families, confirmed biological reality.\
The core of this research focused on how phosphoproteomic data was handled in order to
produce discriminant data points. Such discriminant data points constitute an essential input
of a tool, caspo, we developed to learn BNs. Retrieving discriminant models is classically done
by machine learning and statistical methods. For the Dream 9 challenge these methods were
proposed and focused mainly on clinical variables, since they found them more discriminant of
AML patient response to treatment than proteomics data. Our graph-based approach applied
a machine learnign logical program to obtain a discriminant dataset, used later by caspo to
discover boolean gates between discriminant species connected in a prior regulatory network.\
This approach is interesting in our current research because it allows to obtain discriminant
input-data, focusing on a specific subset of species across a specific subset of individuals, to
learn BNs. It relied on the high dimensionality of the dataset: 231 species measured for 191
AML individuals. Similar problems, for example considering single-cell data, have larger
dimensions (e.g. 30000 genes across 1500 cells) and may generate multiple choices for input-
data as well. Current machine learning approaches to handle single-cell data focus on
similarites or co-expression regions (e.g. WGCNA) to reduce the dimension of genes. We
believe it can be also interesting to focus on the differences, mutual-exclusiveness and
contrasts of single-cell expression, across multiple states to select genes behaviors that allow
us to learn a consensual model or families of BNs that explain different paths taken by cells to
arrive to the same cell-fate.
