---
date: 2024-12-06 13:00:00
title: "Séminaire virtuel: vendredi 6 décembre 2024"
summary: "Adrien Rougny (Univ Luxembourg)"
categories: "Séminaires"
---


[Lien Zoom](https://u-bordeaux-fr.zoom.us/j/86764096440?pwd=b01qOG04RTMvRWNOVHBYR1ZIbkVaUT09)
* Meeting ID: 867 6409 6440
* passcode: 149120 


### 13h00 - 13h50 -- Adrien Rougny (Univ Luxembourg)

**Tools for the semantical analysis and integration of molecular maps**

Molecular maps are graphical knowledge bases gathering known molecular interactions coming into play in a biological system (e.g., a disease, a signaling pathway, a metabolic network).
They are most often built manually by domain experts using dedicated software (e.g., CellDesigner, Newt), standards (e.g., SBGN) and annotations (e.g., PubMed ids, UniProt ids), and may be exchanged using XML-based formats (e.g., SBGN-ML or SBML).
The primary purpose of such maps is for researchers to easily visualize and exchange detailed knowledge on a system, but they may also serve as a support for a wide variety of tasks, for example the creation of dynamical models or the visualization of experimental data.
Understanding the interplay between several biological systems represented by maps may require their integration, which remains a challenging task.
Indeed, manual integration of large maps is practically infeasible, and therefore (semi-)automatic tools are needed.
While efficient tools exist for the visualization, edition and exchange of maps, there are currently no tools for their semantical analysis (i.e., what they represent), which is a prerequisite to their integration.
In this talk, we present a set of tools we are developing towards the semantical analysis and integration of maps.
We show how these tools are currently used in the Commorbidity Mechanisms UTilized in HealthcarE project (COMMUTE) to decipher comorbidity mechanisms between COVID-19 and neurodegenerative diseases, and how they may be part of a more general framework aiming for re-usability and composability in molecular maps. 
