---
date: 2024-03-15 13:00:00
title: "Séminaire virtuel: vendredi 15 mars 2024"
draft: false
summary: "Vincent Noël (Institut Curie)"
categories: "Séminaires"
---


[Lien Zoom](https://u-bordeaux-fr.zoom.us/j/86764096440?pwd=b01qOG04RTMvRWNOVHBYR1ZIbkVaUT09)
* Meeting ID: 867 6409 6440
* passcode: 149120 


### 13h00 - 13h50 -- Vincent Noël (Institut Curie)

**PhysiBoSS, an multiscale modeling framework**

A vast part of the biological modeling community historically focused on intracellular mechanisms such as signaling pathways of individual cell types. However, many biological systems must integrate multiple cell types and their interactions to really make sense of their behavior. A new effort is being done in this direction, in particular for the development of digital twins which would ultimately describe a whole body. 
In this talk we introduce PhysiBoSS, a multiscale modeling framework which allows the description of populations of cells evolving in space interacting with each other and with biochemical substrates. The spatial component is described using an agent-based framework, while the description of individual cell types and their signaling is represented by continuous time Boolean models.
We will first present simple models and describe how they can be easily built using PhysiCell Studio, a simple graphical interface. We will later describe a more complex example with a cancer invasion model. We believe this framework is a step in the direction of increasing the number of space and time scales necessary to tackle larger, more complex biological systems.

