---
date: 2025-04-04 13:00:00
title: "Séminaire virtuel: vendredi 4 avril 2025"
summary: "Ovidiu Radulescu (Univ de Montpelier / Lphi)"
categories: "Séminaires"
---


**Please note that the [Zoom link](https://us02web.zoom.us/j/84486915995?pwd=oOruBGFbADKYreMMFCZr0UBKslUfUC.1) for this seminar is different than usual.**
* Meeting ID: 844 8691 5995
* Passcode: 704611


### 13h00 - 13h50 -- Ovidiu Radulescu (Univ de Montpelier / Lphi)

**Hierarchical block decomposition of biological systems**

Modularity is recognized as an organizing principle of biological systems.
Biological function can be more easily understood by decomposing a large system into smaller parts called modules.
In particular, hierarchical decomposition can facilitate model training and formal analysis of computational biology models.
Instead of solving these difficult problems directly, one first solves them on sub-models and then extends the solution recursively to the full model.
These principles are general and can be applied in many areas.
I will discuss algorithms for hierarchical decomposition and learning, using examples from signaling pathways relevant to cancer and neuroscience.
Interestingly, nature solves difficult problems hierarchically.
Fisher's geometric model of adaptive evolution predicts that the rate of evolution grows exponentially with an organism's complexity.
However, considering that satisfaction of adaptive constraints is modular and hierarchical, allows for overcoming of the complexity barrier.
